[Music]
hey everyone welcome back to night sky
news for february
2019 and there has been a lot of cool
stuff happening in space news this month
so we've got a lot to get through
so let's just jump straight in first
into looking up
alright so as in the previous months
venus saturn and jupiter are all still
visible in the night sky in the early
morning and
mars in the early evening sky as well so
make sure you look out for those
if you're not sure which one's which
there's a couple of conjunctions coming
up this month
that might help you to pick them out
more easily so a conjunction is
basically when two objects in the night
sky
line up kind of on the same sort of sky
longitude and it makes them really easy
to spot because they also come
really really close together as well so
on the 1st of march
saturn is going to have a conjunction
with the moon so that means that the
moon is going to pass about a fingers
breath
higher than saturn in the sky
right before dawn so the moon is going
to be this really thin crescent as well
so it's going to be a really really cool
sight to see
should just be able to see it here in
the uk although it will be quite low in
the sky so a clear horizon is going to
be key
but the further south you are the better
chance you'll have at spotting it then
there's going to be another conjunction
on the 2nd of march as well this time
between the moon
and venus and for this one unfortunately
we're not going to be able to see it in
the uk here so the further south you are
the better i'm talking like you know
like south of toronto to have a chance
of seeing this
um and this is gonna be where the moon
will pass around about sort of two thumb
breaths away from venus
below venus in the sky the next morning
as well
and again it's gonna be a really really
slim crescent in the sky this time just
two days before new to a really
spectacular sight so the 21st of march
is actually the last super moon of the
year as well so super moon is when
the moon looks about 15 brighter and
about 7 bigger
in the sky so that when it's quite low
on the horizon it looks really
spectacular and quite large in
comparison to the other objects that
you're seeing it
nearby this is because basically the
moon's orbit isn't circular so there are
places in its orbit where it comes a
little bit closer to earth
than normal and when that coincides the
full moon we call it
a super moon uh quite sad that it's the
last one
of the year because they are spectacular
they do look beautiful in the sky i
won't see another one of those
this year but also at the same time
quite happy because the media will stop
hyping it up and probably calling it a
super worm
moon despite the fact that nobody
actually calls it that
in astronomy alright so that's it from
what i think you should probably keep an
eye out for
in march in the sky but let's come back
down to earth and chat about what's been
happening in space news in february
[Music]
so first off i want to talk about the
new horizons flyby of ultima thule again
because it's been sending back
more images and we've been finding out
more cool things about this
kuiper belt object so you remember that
there was the flyby
on new year's day uh in 2019 and it sent
back that amazing image on its approach
where the asteroid
that it was approaching was fully lit by
the sun and it was like the snowman
shape and they dubbed the
head of the snowman ultima and the
bottom larger part thought
i said at that point that actually it
took so many images that it's gonna be
sending images back for another two
years
just as the bandwidth isn't long enough
to send them all back at once
and we've got a couple of those now so
these images have come from when
the spacecraft is no longer looking at
ultimate thor from the front
sun facing side but sort of from the
side and back of ultimate thought where
the sun actually isn't
lighting it up anymore so you can't
actually see anything technically in the
image but what you can see
is the dark area where ultimate fall is
where it blocks the background stars
behind it as her new horizons flies past
so what you can do is therefore trace
out the outline
of stars that are blocked to get an idea
of what shape ultimate soul
is so they found when they pieced
together that shape is that actually
ultimate isn't spherical
like we thought like snowman spheres
it's actually
flat so thool is flat like a pancake and
then ultima the smaller sort of top bit
of the snowman's head is kind of more
like
walnut shaped and there is a little bit
of uncertainty on this because actually
new horizon spacecraft was traveling
quite fast when it did this flyby
so we see the stars in the background
get kind of a little blurred and you
kind of can't tell where the edges
of the object necessarily are but even
within
those uncertainties it's still pretty
flat
and it's weird like we still think that
those two
objects have come together to make
ultimate soul like they've both formed
separately ultima and thor and then
collided quite slowly and come together
but how did thou like form like as a
flat pancake in the first place because
it's such a weird shape for it to be you
know most of our solar system formation
models of like early solar system and
tiny particles clumping together under
gravity
is that the most stable sort of shape
they can be in is kind of a sphere
because then gravity is sort of equal
on all the surface you know we have
perfect sphere kind of lumpy but this
thing is like
flat which is like really weird so solar
system modelers are kind of going to
have to refine their models and see what
changes they can make to
try and reproduce something that's
weirdly this
flat so it's really cool we have learnt
so much from new horizons already from
this flyby and we've barely got a
fraction
of the images back already incidentally
the raw images are posted by nasa like
every friday
from off the telescope in the data dome
that it's got that week and they are put
online as well so i'll post the link in
the description below for all of those
who want to have a little look at those
images so sticking with solar system
exploration
and asteroids did you see that this
hayabusa 2 spacecraft
had actually managed to touch down on
the asteroid
rigoo so this isn't in the kuiper belt
anymore like ultimate thought this is
actually a near earth
asteroid so we got there in june 2018
this craft
and it was supposed to do this landing
in october but it was a little bit
delayed
after its three and a half year journey
from earth because the surface of ryugu
wasn't uh what they were expecting it
was a lot more rugged there was a lot of
boulders on the surface it's got craggly
really
and they were looking for a really nice
sort of flat
open large bit of space they could land
in so that the landing would be a little
bit
easier you know that was sort of like a
100 meter wide plane that they could
land and they couldn't find it on the
imaging that they were getting back
from the surface in the end they managed
to land on a six meter wide
plane that they'd found the flattest bit
that they could find
which is an incredible feat really so
what they've done is they've lowered the
spacecraft down to the surface they've
fired a
bullet into the surface for one of a
better idea they fired a projectile into
the surface
which has kicked up a load of the rock
and dust on the surface
and hopefully has managed to actually
capture
some of that rock and surface material
in a canister to bring back to earth
next december 2020 which will be really
really exciting
before it does that it's also scheduled
in about april time to basically
detonate an explosive on the surface of
this asteroid as well
in the hope that it will dig down and
make a really big crater
so we can get a sample of rocks from the
bottom of that crater as well so you can
get rocks from the surface that have
been exposed to space
and then rocks that have been sort of
buried under the asteroid you know not
seeing
the light of day since the very early
formation of the solar system
now nasa has a similar mission called
osiris-rex as well which i talked about
in december that's going to the asteroid
bennu uh and it got there in december
and is now doing that sort of image
recon trying to find a space to land on
and then also to collect its sample to
bring it back for about 2023
and so it's good that there's like two
missions japanese and american led
mission
and that are both trying to do the same
thing because then they'll be able to
compare results
uh bennu is also a near-earth asteroid
so they'll both be comparing
um the formation of these two separate
objects whether they were
formed similarly or different for
different reasons and just to compare
results that's
what science is all about really isn't
it is comparing and repeating
experiments the cool thing is that
osiris-rex will actually be able to tell
if it's collected
any of the particles that it finds so
the canister that it's going to actually
take all that rock and dust from the
surface back to earth with
is actually going to be on an arm on
osiris-rex so what it will do is it will
spin
round that arm before it collects the
sample and then after it collects the
sample and what it will do is it will
measure something called the moment of
inertia
moment of inertia is basically just like
how easy or hard it is to accelerate
something and that all depends on you
know how heavy the mass is at the end of
the arm that you have so
if it changes before collecting and
after collecting the sample we'll know
how much
uh sample of rock you've been actually
able to collect
from the surface of bennu fortunately uh
hayabusu does not have this arm thing
it collects its sample very close to it
it's sort of very internalized and so we
won't know until it gets back in
december 2020. so i am really excited
for that
so sticking in the solar system let's
talk about opportunity rover because uh
i i have to admit i shed a little tear
at my desk last week when i found out
that it had been declared
as mission over opportunity has been the
most amazing
rover to have on mars we've learned so
much from it you know it touched down on
mars in
2004 and along with its partner rover
spirit at the same time they were
supposed to only last
90 days each spirit made it to 2010 an
opportunity to 2018 2019.
so if you remember nasa lost contact
with opportunity in about
june 2018 last year when a
planet-sized dust storm engulfed mars
and all the recordings we were getting
from opportunity weather its power
levels were dropping
significantly that's because the dust
was actually blocking out sunlight and
so it couldn't get enough power from its
solar panels
to function as normal so on may 8 2018
it recorded that it got
667 watt hours of energy from solar
power that day
whereas on june 10th 2018 it only had 22
watt hours of energy uh managed to
harvest from the sun just because so
much of it was blocked out
by the dust storm that was engulfing
this planet these dust storms that are
planet-wide happen once every three
years or so they're not your average
dust storm
at all and they form just like storms on
earth do so their
sun heats the air like directly above
the surface of the planet
that hot air rises and it does so it
takes dust with it and so every three
earth years or so the conditions are
right so that storm
actually escalates and it's a
planet-wide
system and you can see the data from a
lot of the satellites from around mars
recording
the features on mars before that storm
engulfed it and after it you can see
that it's basically just been washed out
the entire
planet and so opportunity unfortunately
was stuck in the middle of that so
opportunity was programmed so that if
the voltage of its battery did dip below
24 volts
it would basically put itself into like
low power mode i guess just like you do
on your phone
um and basically it would turn off all
like non-crucial
systems and it would sort of go to sleep
the only system it wouldn't turn off was
its
internal clock and every so often that
clock would give
a opportunity a little signal to say hey
wake up have we got enough power to send
a signal back to earth and if it didn't
it would go back to sleep again
and so this has happened before in 2007
both spirit and opportunity were caught
in one of these planet
wide dust storms but thankfully they
were able to be recovered
a couple of months later after the storm
had dissipated
and they got into hibernation mode just
fine and managed to wake up
out of it this time over the storm
abated in about october 2018
and then nasa waited a couple of months
until the windy season on mars which was
sort of november december time
so that the wind would hopefully remove
any uh dust that was actually collected
on the
solar panels surface as well so it would
have had a long time
to get clean and then also like absorb
more energy to
kick start it again so that period of
time had passed and it was getting sort
of january february and they wanted to
try and wake up the rover again so
before february 13th
there had been over a thousand commands
sent to opportunity
that had gone completely unanswered and
so at that point nasa decided to declare
that there must have been some critical
failure with the mission presumably that
the internal clock that gets left on
even when it's in that low power mode
had failed
either because of extreme cold or
possibly even because of the dust had
got into the uh system as well because
the dust grains are not like sort of
sand grains they're they're really
really fine and they can
really ruin your electronic systems i
mean i know it was only supposed to last
90 days so it's been absolutely
incredible that it's managed to last 15
years
instead but i was extra sad because it
means that that amazing
xkcd comic about opportunity can no
longer come true
as well which makes me extra sad so it
actually managed to travel more than
45 kilometers on the surface of mars as
well which is further than every other
martian rover combined has managed to
travel it's actually further than
a marathon so maybe opie has actually
earned its rest after doing a 15-year
long marathon
okay so my favorite bit of news this
month was from
the lofar project in the lofar team so
if you didn't see this in the news lofa
is the low
frequency array it's an array of
telescopes in the radio regime
which are across europe mostly in the
netherlands but then also dotted around
europe as well
that are combined to make one giant
radio telescope and what it's been doing
is
surveying the northern sky in about 2.5
meter wavelength which is like 120
megahertz frequency waves
and what happened this month is they've
had their first data release
of about 424 square degrees
of the northern sky which is actually
only two percent of what they actually
have
planned to observe is a tiny chunk
of what this mission has planned what
they're able to do was from all those
raw images was extract
about 326 000 individual sources
of radio emission in the sky everything
from you know active galactic nuclear
giving off in the radio
to pulsars and star forming regions uh
in galaxies
and say this is where all those sources
of radio emission are in the sky
and about 70 of those actually had uh
what we call an
optical counterpart so that they could
associate the radio emission
with something that had already been
seen in the optical or the visible
wavelengths of light so that was one bit
of the story that really annoyed me when
it was reported in the media because
there were like
300 000 new galaxies found and it was
like no
because we've already seen them in the
optical we already knew they were there
the galaxies it's just 300 000
now that we know that also have radio
emission as well so the new bit was the
fact that they have this radio
emission there's about 25 new
astronomical journal papers
released this month either describing
the data
or the survey or how the reduction of
the images were done
and then also some actually using the
data to do some really cool
science as well for me one of the
coolest results came from saboteur ital
and that's because they were looking at
these active galactic nuclei
galaxies where the supermassive black
hole in the center
is actually growing so this is kind of
close to my own research
i just tend to look in the optical
rather than the radio
but they found that if you took a
catalog of these active galactic nuclei
and looked where the radio emission was
which of them had radiation
they found that the highest mass
galaxies always
have radio emission from their
supermassive black holes
which generally tends to mean that they
are growing they are
active which is weird for us because
we've been thinking for a long time that
black hole growth is like stochastic
like it's on and off again it's not
something that's constant whereas this
result is suggesting
that actually that is constant like the
black hole is
always accreting material and growing in
the highest of mass galaxies which is
really interesting because we think that
that
feedback from that growth of the black
hole can actually stop the galaxy from
forming stars
in the most massive galaxies so it's
really interesting to see that link
there and i think that's a really really
cool result this is only two percent of
the planned coverage of the sky though
and they said in one of the papers that
actually
the current amount of observing done is
about 20
of the sky so in the time that it took
them to get the 2
and analyze and reduce everything and
write that up they've done another 18
worth of the observing a plan to do and
i was chatting to one of my friends
in oxford leia moribito who's on the
low-far team
and she was telling me that the reason
that the data reduction just takes so
long is a because of just
sheer volume of data that they get off
the sky you know a whole
sky survey they've got a lot to play
with but then also
the fact that the reduction is
incredibly incredibly difficult and
that's all to do with the fact that you
get atmospheric
effects ruining your data basically so
the same way that optical data can be
ruined
by the light traveling through the
atmosphere and getting
distorted a similar thing happens in the
radio except that it's actually a faint
emission
of radio waves from the ionosphere as
well this sort of portion of the earth's
atmosphere and unlike an optical thing
where you know the images that i take in
the optical with professional telescopes
they're like a 60th of a degree in size
and that's it like one single exposure
or pointing whereas with this radio
telescope with lofa
one single pointing is like 20 degrees
square of sky
like it's a huge portion of the sky and
so you can't just model for one tiny
section you have to model for the
atmospheric
aberrations across that entire region
of sky apparently the biggest bottleneck
now though is actually just getting the
images they've taken
off the computer that they've archived
them on like literally the images are so
large and there is so much data that the
bandwidth
is obviously just not big enough to
literally get them off
the computer to work on them in enough
time what i'm really excited about
though is that they're doing
follow-up of all of these sources that
they've found uh
that have optical counterparts to them
to be able to get really precise
distances so they're doing follow-up
with the optical with a spectrograph
which is where you split the light from
a galaxy through a prism and you get
that sort of signature
of its light and you can tell if it's
been redshifted due to distance
and so at the minute yes they know the
positions of all these galaxies but
they're not 100 sure on the distance
they can make
educated guesses based on the optical
light that comes from as well but
they're not that precise
so the spectra follow-up using this
instrument called weave which is going
to be on the william herschel telescope
in la palma a 4.2 meter optical
telescope will be really really cool
because then we'll have very precise
distances
for all of this radio emission as well
so we can study stuff in much greater
detail so the team are working on
reducing all of that data now so there
should be even
more results coming in the future which
i'm really excited about
so i just want to say thanks to my
friends ken duncan and leia moribito who
are on the low-far team that chatted to
me this week
about how exciting these results were
ken and i got particularly excited
on twitter because chris evans aka
captain america
uh noticed this story and tweeted about
it
and then the two of us along with a
couple of other astronomers had this
amazing
thread where we were just discussing how
lofar had peaked
and that all we ever wanted for an
astronomical survey
is for one of the avengers to notice it
and
perhaps bruce banner is just waiting for
that spectroscopic follow-up with the
weaved
data before he gets involved so pretty
good month
for astronomy related news if i'm quite
honest and roll on march 2019
is all i can say oh i forgot this word
plagues me so
full fully thought
opportunity i'm so sorry that i called
you curiosity last week i didn't mean it
i didn't mean
to get the two of you confused oh god a
15 year long marathon i
die does anyone else remember the
mission badges that nasa released for
the spirit and opportunity missions as
well i remember them coming out in like
when i was at school and it was the
coolest thing ever because they had like
marvin the martian and like daffy duck
on them
i remember being like oh my god marvin
the martian actually on mars
you